I know he's told us well just don't
think about Stalin don't think about Mao
Zedong don't think about those extreme
examples the word propaganda sets off
alarm bells we think of Hitler we think
of Stalin don't if you're talking about
messages that are only gonna reach
people who voluntarily buy the ticket
then you have to create works of art
that people want to buy people want to
see and hear and listen to you've got to
get in there and compete with spider-man
and Batman and everyone else at the box
office
[Music]
my views that museums should take a leaf
out of a book of religions if I was a
museum curator I would make a room for
love a room for generosity a room you
know all works of art are talking to us
about things and if we were able to
arrange spaces where we could come
across works where we'd be told
use these works of art to cement these
ideas in your mind we would get a lot
more out of art I know louboutin so I
apologize if my first response was a bit
lengthy but now I can pretty rapidly
proceed through this because the same
issues are coming up again and again are
you going to force school children to
attend these museums with these
exhibitions devoted to these ideals that
you you personally believe in your view
I'll and the bottles view of love and
human decency and these things you want
to preach if I was a museum curator I
would make a room for love who chose you
who elected you to be museum curator
there's a very strange elitist aspect of
this and of course the religions of the
world are only to a very limited extent
grassroots and responding to their
adherents but ultimately they do
ultimately they're answerable to their
donors and their parishioners and the
Communist Party is not Joseph Stalin is
not and worryingly even in a country
like Canada with our modest modestly
dysfunctional form of parliamentary
democracy Parliament decides to make a
Museum of Human Rights Parliament
decides to make a museum about
indigenous peoples First Nations peoples
Native Americans for lack of a better
term who decides the message of that
museum and who wants to see it who wants
to pay $40 to come and see it when you
actually look at the numbers most
museums in order to have the attendance
that they boast of they actually do rely
on forcing school groups of children to
come and see those exhibitions at the
Museum and that in itself really
constrains the messages that they can
deliver
now the other justification for a
museums budget has to do with actually
caring for the
Jax the artifacts the archaeological
site museum G the conservation
preservation even archival site of
Musial G that they're caring for items
of some kind of historical and cultural
value that's not considered here but let
me tell you something I've dealt with
museum budgets they are also in the
hundreds of millions of dollars the
amount of money that governments pour
into museums for very dubious public
benefits very dubious outcomes it's it's
shock inducing its eye watering the
museum exhibits in many ways are like
blockbuster movies but that only a
handful of people ever go to see so it's
a very strange thing that in most modern
Western parliamentary societies we've
just come to accept this that there's a
tiny elite of people in London England
and nobody elected them and nobody
scrutinizes them and they're given
enormous quantities of taxpayers money
to tell us what great art is to tell us
what culture is to tell us what even
theater is and more worryingly to give
us powerful propaganda messages mostly
about the history of world war ii hope
nail with the hundredth anniversary
we're getting some museo lagea but world
war one the last time I went to the
Canadian War Museum and I went to the
British War Museum in England most of
those museums are almost totally focused
on World War two
you're not going to get a lot of deep
examination of England's role in
unpopular wars in Africa oh you're not
gonna get soul-searching about the
history of the British slave trade or
this kind of thing why because these
museums do serve a propaganda purpose
and there's nothing grassroots there's
nothing answerable to the public about
it so I don't know why he has this faith
for lack of a better world that the
secularization of propaganda in elite
forms in museums and art institutions
that this could transform society I
think in order to believe that again I
know he's told us well just don't think
about Stalin don't think about my house
the dog don't think about those extreme
examples
who who do you think this message would
possibly reach if you're talking about
messages that are only gonna reach
people who voluntarily buy the ticket
then you have to create works of art
that people want to buy people want to
see and hear and listen to you've got to
get in there and compete with spider-man
and Batman and everyone else at the box
office and I for my part as an atheist
as a nihilist as a vegan I do want to
compete I want to compete with Curious
George I want to compete with all the
children's books I want to compete with
Peppa Pig I want to compete with Mickey
Mouse but I precisely see that as a form
of artistic free market competition and
not as propaganda and what that leaves
you is the very very limited margin to
be didactic because if it's a little bit
too didactic then you start to resemble
compulsory education and for the
purposes of this discussion the most
important part there is questioning what
makes it compulsory what to organize
religions do they group together they
form institutions and that has all sorts
of advantages
first of all scale might the Catholic
Church pulled in 97 billion dollars last
year according to The Wall Street
Journal so religions are the foremost
example of an institution that is
fighting for the things of the mind now
we may not agree with what religions are
trying to teach us but we can admire the
institutional way in which they're doing
it books alone books written by lone
individuals are not going to change
anything so in part here again we have a
repetition of the same fundamental
economic and political naivete that we
heard before
oh you envy the Catholic Church for
collecting tens of millions of dollars
what would be the basis for people
donating tens of million dollars to you
or for your imaginary cause your
imaginary foundation it's very difficult
to make a case for fundraising for any
of these things you're proposing but
moreover one of the fundamental things
that's changed in the 21st century
simply the ease of disseminating ideas I
could understand his pessimism about
people publishing a book he says when
has publishing a book ever made a
difference when has a lone person
publishing a book ever made a difference
every day of my life I mean in the 21st
century to say this books alone books
written by lone individuals are not
gonna change anything know me the 17th
century 16th I don't know how far back
we'd have to go but for most of the
history of civilization even without
having a printing press or I did history
of Southeast Asia where it was all
handwritten manuscripts using a metal
stylus to scrape into palm leaves palm
leaf manuscripts but still new ideas and
stories spread across the continent like
wildfire no so writing a book can change
the world and I think what's worth
facing up to is the the saddening extent
to which commercial mass media
entertainment like Batman and spider-man
and Curious George and Peppa Pig those
are books that change the world um Harry
Potter one woman sitting alone wrote
this book and have this enormous impact
and yeah if you want to take it that far
I totally despised Karl Marx but what
are you gonna tell me that Karl Marx
didn't change the world by publishing a
book how about you compare his
publishing books to everything else he
did in his life I think you can look at
the organization of mass of groups of
people mass organizations hundreds of
people are thousands of people within
the life of Karl Marx and other people's
lives and say oh wow you did all this
work organizing this event or organizing
these people even if you had a
demonstration that lasted a day or
something ten years later where is the
trace of it what influence did have on
planet Earth the the types of impact you
can possibly have through anything other
than publishing a book seems to be very
easy to be cynical about but we live in
a world in the 21st century when it's
more difficult to make money out of book
publishing than ever but to write ideas
that matter to people and change the
world that's very easy to do and we
don't need tens of millions of the horse
to do it hey it'd be great if you got
ten thousand bucks
for an advertising budget get a literary
agent promote your ideas great you can
help but as never before were
unencumbered from needing just the the
infrastructure of an organization like
the Catholic Church and again on what
basis does the Catholic Church collect
tens of millions of dollars lies
deception threats and oppression I don't
want to be part of a movement based on a
lie I don't want to collect donations
from people with phony promises of
liberation or political outcomes I can't
deliver for talking about real world
stuff I don't want to be part of a
religion like modern Buddhism that
promises people things that you know
promises them health benefits or
meditation that just don't exist so on
and so forth I don't want to promise
people something as banal as inner peace
and I don't want to promise them they're
gonna be freed from the chains of
capitalism or all the things that seem
to motivate people to donate money and
then to have very little scrutiny about
what's done with the money after they
after they donate it so if the case is
gonna be made for large institutions
having large sums of money at their
disposal you'd need to be in a situation
where millions of people were motivated
by one commonly understood objective
they all share veganism has got that
atheism doesn't and to re-appropriate
his term here
atheism 2.0 I think interesting use of
the idea of atheism 2.0 would be
switching from an era one point though
when we were mostly talking about the
critique of religion by atheists and the
critique of atheists by religion and
switching on to atheism 2.0 a period of
time when atheists are really engaged in
criticizing one another in order to try
to find that objective that clear sense
of social change cultural change and
political change and then decide on how
they're going to achieve it I think that
might be atheism 2.0 and I'm
eager to get on to atheism 3.0 because I
want to start collecting donations to
publish this children's book I'm writing
I'm writing right now a children's book
trying to challenge Christmas trying to
provide some kind of meaningful holiday
meaningful mythology if you like it's
not religious you know secular people
can have a meaningful you know end of
December holiday with their kids I'm
interested in producing that new
cultural change to challenge what came
before but guess what we can do it in a
highly decentralized non hierarchical
mutually respectful participatory
transparent and very low-cost way that
education the process of education
particularly higher education will make
us into nobler and better human beings
that's a lovely idea it's also an idea
that we have forgotten you know if you
went to a top university let's say you
went to Harvard or Oxford or Cambridge
and you said you know I've come here
because I'm in search of morality
guidance and consolation I want to know
how to live they would show you the way
to the insane asylum this is simply not
what our grandest and best Institutes of
higher learning are in the business of
in the United States of America people
go $50,000 into debt to get a university
education and more the opportunity cost
even if you have a fully paid
scholarship of losing four years of your
life we already have a crisis in our
society of people in the humanities
going to university and receiving
diplomas that do not in any way open up
forms of employment for them this is a
crisis on a massive scale we did make
several videos talking about this at
length and doing a book review there
were quantitative studies there were
real dimensions to this that run deep so
in 2018 a landable tone looks at this
broken higher education system and it's
not broken from the perspective of the
professors it's broken in terms of the
service its providing the students and I
can say to society as a whole and
enormous quantity of resources is being
poured into this higher education system
by the government
and from the students and from their
parents in terms of tuition and he sees
this and he says oh this should be more
like medieval education this should be
more like communist education this
should be more of a situation we are
having inculcated into you moral and
ethical values and as I asked before
with the production of art the
production of propaganda whose moral
values who elected you I mean if you're
the rector of this university if you're
the president of this university if you
are as he fantasizes the curator for
this museum so your morality now takes
on this people Authority why and why
would I pay for it
whether I'm the donor fronting the money
two hundred and fifty million dollars
for you to make this movie or I'm the
the viewer I'm the member of the
audience buying my ticket for whatever
it is now thirteen dollars fifteen
dollars to to see a movie or from the
student paying five thousand dollars
maybe fifty thousand dollars to get this
education why am I paying you for it why
am I paying for you to give me a
morality lecture and maybe this is the
greatest irony of all because you know
one of the things that's really touching
about a sincere religion like tera vaada
Buddhism is precisely that the monks are
forbidden to touch money that they're
supposed to walk barefoot from town to
town giving people morality lectures and
guess what if you ask people to pay for
you to stand there and explain to them
that they're an immoral character that
they need to be more upright people are
not going to pay you for this neither as
donors nor as supplicants and they don't
begin from any common sense of belief or
objective which we as vegans have and
you as atheists don't say hey this is
what we all want to accomplish
therefore donate this money to me and
I'm gonna produce propaganda to achieve
this goal so again I think the most
unexamined error here on every level and
it comes up again again again it's most
visible when talked about economically
but the real underlying error is one of
authority it's one of hierarchy that all
of his face
seas are top down there of enlightened
and noble atheists like himself becoming
the president of the university becoming
the professor becoming the museum
curator becoming the person in power who
gets the point the finger and act like
the Pope and dictate what morality is
and what love and the Brotherhood of
humanity is and that other people are
just gonna have to take it well there's
a reason why people associate this view
of society with Joseph Stalin and Mao
Zedong and maybe to some extent the
Nazis and Adolf Hitler okay it's because
your fantasy alone Atlanta Bell tone is
authoritarian and we have alternatives
like right now here on YouTube or pretty
much every day I upload morality
lectures I don't really do one of my
most popular videos of all time is why
you should not drink alcohol is me
lecturing equation drag alcohol but the
people who watch my videos don't have to
pay me a dime and they can walk out of
the theater any time none of them are
captive audience when people ask who
elected you who elected me the answer is
my audience did because what we have
here is a transparent open-ended
participant participatory participatory
model for cooperation collaboration and
spreading of ideas and in 2018 it's this
format not reproducing the authoritarian
relationships of the Dark Ages that are
winning a landable tone I understand
your aesthetic yearning for some of the
trappings of religion but when you look
past the trappings you have to recognize
that the money authority and power that
religion built up and why it exhibits
those traveling's is all built on a lie
[Music]